- This is the last one?
- I don't know.
There's no ether, either.
Jesus Christ.
You there!
Is this the last one?
Oh, God, what a mess.
At least there's no gangrene.
But there will be
if it doesn't come off soon.
Well, I can't saw
if I can't keep my eyes open.
I'm sorry.
Let's coffee up.
He can wait a few more minutes.
Oh, God!
St. David's field - Tennessee
Glass.
is that Tucker's men?
Yes, sir.
I think it is.
How long has it been like this?
We just found them
this morning, sir.
They've been here for two days.
Is that you, lieutenant?
Sons of bitches.
Come on. You better take cover.
I ain't kidding. These boys are shooters.
Come on. Go under cover.
There you go.
You went to the hospital?
It was no good.
What's going on here?
That seems to be
the question, all right.
See, you could ask the major.
But he don't know.
He's busy.
He's busy trying to figure out
how come the officers' mess
run out of peach ice cream.
Then, of course,
you got the general.
He come up to see the show.
All he knows is
there ain't no show.
Which ain't entirely correct, see,
because we started a balloon up,
but they shot her down
before we got 10 feet off the ground.
Nobody's made a run either way.
It's been a stand-off all damn day.
Now, the major,
he's looking at the general.
He's thinking to himself,
"I better do something."
You know what that means.
I sure as hell don't want to be
the first one across this field.
They're supposed to be
beat up just like us.
Hell, everybody knows
Tucker's men are tough as cobs.
So far, the only thing been killed
out here is three milking cows.
Course, that's about to change.
You son of a bitch.
You know, some of the boys are saying,
if we ain't gonna fight,
we could just settle this
whole business with a little
high-stakes poker.
Wouldn't that be a sight?
A bunch of fellas
sitting in the middle of this field,
drawing cards.
Soldier: What is it, sir?
Looks like a suicide.
Tucker!
What's he doing?
Soldier: Over here!
What did you say to him?
I didn't say nothing.
You son of a bitch!
Come on back,
you son of a bitch!
Come on back!
- Come on back!
- You won't make it no second time!
All right by me.
Yeah!
Forgive me, father.
He's coming back again!
Here he comes, boys!
- Ready!
- I got him.
Don't-- Don't--
Don't take off my foot.
You rest easy, son.
You'll keep your foot.
As god is my judge,
you'll keep it.
Bring up my ambulance.
Sir?
Bring up my ambulance,
and bring my surgeon with it!
We got an officer
who's worth something lying here.
"The strangeness of this life
cannot be measured.
“In trying to produce
my own death,
"l was elevated to the
status of a living hero.
"I was also awarded Cisco,
“the trusty mount that carried me
across the field that day.
"And on full recovery, was given
transfer to any station I desired.
"The bloody slaughter continues
in the east as I arrive at Fort Hayes,
"a tiny island of men and material
"surrounded by
a never-ending sea of prairie."
Well, it's not easy
to raise my own foot, too.
Hey, bill.
- Lieutenant.
Where can I find major Fambrough?
All the way down
the end of the hall.
Thank you.
"Lieutenant John J. Dunbar."
Lieutenant John J. Dunbar?
- Yes, sir.
- "Yes, sir."
Indian fighter, huh?
Excuse me?
Well, it says here that you're to
be posted on the frontier.
The frontier is Indian country.
I quickly deduced that
you're an Indian fighter.
I did not ascend to this position
by being stupid.
- No, sir.
- "No, sir."
It says here that
you've been decorated.
Yes, sir.
And they sent you here
to be posted?
Actually, sir,
I'm here at my own request.
Really? Why?
I've always wanted
to see the frontier.
You want to see the frontier?
Yes, sir.
Before it's gone.
Such a smart lad,
coming straight to me.
Sir... knight,
I am sending you
on a knight's errand.
You will report to captain cargill
at the furthermost
outpost of the realm,
Fort Sedgewick.
My personal seal
will assure your safety
through the many miles
of wild and hostile country.
- I was wondering--
- Yes?
I was wondering, sir,
how will I be getting there?
You think I don't know?
- No, sir.
- You think I don't know.
- It's just that I don't know--
- Hold your tongue.
I happen to be in a generous mood
and I will grant your boon.
See that peasant out there?
He calls himself Timmons.
He's going to your Fort Sedgewick
this very afternoon.
You can ride with him if you like.
He knows the way.
Thank you. That is all.
Sir knight?
I've just pissed in my pants,
and nobody can do
anything about it.
To your journey!
To my journey!
Haw!
Giddy on a little bit, Jim!
- Have this by tomorrow.
- Yes, sir.
I'll have my crown now.
- Sir?
- I'll have my crown now!
- I-I'm sorry, sir.
- Are you deaf, fool?
I said I'll have my crown, by god!
Now! Now!
- No.
- Sir.
- I'll get your crown.
- No.
No.
Timmons: Come on, little Jim!
Get on up!
Man: Major.
Major?
The king is dead.
Long live the king.
Man: The major!
Get back!
The shot came from inside!
Haw a little bit, Jim and Jake!
Haw a little bit, Jim!
Haw a little bit.
Gee a little bit, Jim!
Gee a little bit.
Gee on a little bit.
The hell was that?
What is that?
What the hell is that?
Why don't you
put that in your book?
“Were it not for my companion,
"I believe I would be having
the time of my life.
"I know he means well,
"but he is quite possibly
the foulest man I have ever met.”
How far you make the fort?
Far.
How far?
Forty, fifty miles, maybe.
What's the big hurry on Sedgewick?
It's gonna be my post.
My home.
You ain't hard to please,
I'll give you that much.
Whoa, oh, oh, oh, oh!
Look yonder.
What you got there?
Somebody back east is saying,
"why don't she write?"
You stupid bastard!
Get up, Timmons.
Timmons.
Get up.
Come on, Get up.
Get up!
Someone poked me in my butt.
Was that you?
God damn it!
I'm gonna have a welt.
Corporal guest.
Corporal guest, you don't have
to talk to me, just please come out.
It's the end.
Assemble the men
in front of my quarters.
You hate me.
But I feel
none of the same for you.
You men stayed.
You stayed after
they took all our horses.
all the others deserted.
You stayed after
the army failed to resupply us.
I have looked for that wagon
from Fort Hayes,
just as you have,
day after miserable day.
And all I can say
is that I'm proud of you.
Now, get your things, men.
We're leaving this place.
The army can go to hell.
Go. Get your things.
John: How come we haven't
seen any buffalo?
You can't figure
the stinking buffalo.
You can't. Sometimes you
won't see any for days.
Other times, they'll be thick,
like curls on a whore.
What about Indians?
Indians?
Goddamn Indians!
You just as soon not see them
unless the bastards are dead.
They're nothing but
thieves and beggars.
Haw, up there!
Not what you would call
much of a going concern now, is it?
Go down there.
- Why? There ain't nothing down there.
- Because I said.
Go down there.
Haw! Haw!
Ain't that a son of a bitch!
There ain't nothing here, lieutenant.
Hey!
Lieutenant!
Everybody's ran off or got killed.
All right.
Let's unload the wagon.
What?
What, and leave it all here?
I'm staying, too.
There ain't nothing here, lieutenant.
No, not at the moment.
We don't know what's happened.
So, so, l--
Things--
Things being as they are,
we might as well just turn around
and get headed back.
- This is my post.
- "This is my post"?
This is my post.
"This is my post"?
Jesus H. Christ.
What, are you crazy, boy?
Lieutenant.
Fast son of a bitch.
- Jesus H. Christ!
- This is my post.
All right, put it down.
Put it down.
And these are the
post provisions, all right?
Now, get your ass off the wagon...
- Put it down!
- and help me unload.
We're just having a conversation.
Now put it down.
I'll let them know where you are.
Good.
Good luck, lieutenant.
Thank you.
Jake and Jim!
Good mule! Good mule!
Haw up there now!
Haw!
Haw up there! Haw up there!
Haw up there!
Good boy.
Come on, now.
Get up on there.
Haw now. Good mules!
Haw up there.
"Have arrived to find
Fort Sedgewick deserted.
"I'm now waiting for Garrison's
return or word from headquarters.
"The post is in
exceedingly poor condition
"and I have decided to assign myself
clean-up duty beginning tomorrow.
"Supplies are abundant,
"and the country is everything
I dreamed it would be.
"There can be no place
like this on earth."
Bad horse.
“The animals in the pond
had not been poisoned,
"they had all been shot.
"But why? Was it for sport?
Could it have been out of spite?
"My first guess would have been
that the men here were starving,
"but this rotting waste
speaks to the contrary.
"The caves are
an even bigger mystery.
"What could have driven men
to live in caves?
"Perhaps they were frightened.
"Maybe there had been
some sort of revolt.
“I can make no sense
of the clues left me here.
"Perhaps my relief
will provide the answers."
Come on, Cisco.
One more time.
Git up!
Come on.
Git up, Cisco.
Git up.
Git up. There you go.
Easy.
Easy, whoa.
Only a white man would make a fire
for everyone to see.
Maybe there's more than one.
There might be three or four.
I know three or four who
will not be making the trip back home.
We have nothing
to show for this trail.
We have no rifles!
White men are sure to have rifles!
It's hard to say
how many might be down there.
We should forget this
and go home.
Then go.
I would rather die
than argue about a single line of smoke
in my own country.
Understand?
He will not quit
until we are all dead.
Look at me.
Don't... hurt my mules.
Stop. Stop it.
Please don't hurt my mules.
“I am pleased
with my efforts thus far.
"For all of my improvements though,
“there remains an ugliness here
I cannot dispel.
"An injury that goes beyond neglect
"and, like a bruise,
it will be slow to heal.”
"It's been almost 30 days.
“I have come to enjoy the patterns
of my life at Fort Sedgewick,
"especially my daily
reconnaissance rides with Cisco.
"Each day we go
further into the prairie,
"and every discovery,
big or small,
"becomes etched
in my mind forever.
“It would seem I have been marooned,
as no one has yet come for me.
“I can only assume that
there is a problem,
"which the army
will solve shortly.
"Maybe I am being
foolish in my optimism.
"But when I look
to the eastern horizon,
"I never fall to hope
that a column might be out there.”
"Still no sign
of captain cargill's command.
"Though well-supplied,
I've decided to ration my goods
"as if I were part of a post
instead of the whole affair.
"There's a wolf who seems
intent on the goings-on here.
"He does not seem inclined
to be a nuisance, however,
"and aside from Cisco,
has been my only company.
"He's appeared each afternoon
for the past two days.
"He has two milky-white paws.
“If he comes calling tomorrow,
I will name him Two Socks.”
"Almost a month
ahd no one has come.
"The longer this
condition persists,
“the less inclined I am
to believe that anyone will.
"Rain has forced me indoors
for most of two days now,
"and I have begun
work on an awning.
“It is the loneliest
of times for me now,
"but I can say honestly
that I am not unhappy.”
How can I marry
a pretty little girl
when I got no coat to put on?
Oh, soldier, oh, soldier
won't you marry me
before the fight comes home?
How can I marry
a pretty little girl
when I got no shoes to put on?
How can I marry a pretty little girl
when I got no hat to put on?
Oh, soldier, oh, soldier
won't you marry me
before the fight comes home?
How can I marry an ugly little girl
when I got a pretty wife back home?
Here. Here.
You there!
Hey!
"Have made first
contact with a wild Indian.
"One came to the fort
and tried to steal my horse.
"When I appeareq,
he became frightened and ran off.
"Have decided to bury excess ordnance
lest it fall into enemy hands.
"Keeping only the barest
necessities for myself.
"My afternoon rides have been pared
down to short circular patrols
"always keeping the post in sight.
“I'm taking steps to prepare
for another visitation.
"Do not know how many more
might be in the vicinity,
"but I'm assuming that where there is one,
there's sure to be another.
"Most of my work has been geared
toward creating the illusion
"of strength and stability.
“I'm still alone, however,
and unless troops arrive soon,
"all may be lost.”
Kicking Bird has been keeping
to himself these last few days.
I do not like to see
our medicine man walking so alone.
What does his wife say?
She says that
he is keeping to himself.
That's not what I asked you.
Well, what did you ask me?
What did she say?
She said that he is
keeping to himself these days.
That's what she says.
Make sure that meat is soft.
My teeth hurt.
Look at that.
Hello. May I come in?
- Come in, come in.
- Oh, thank you.
How are you?
I hope you're good.
Come here.
No, it's ok.
Let him sit with me.
No.
Our country...
seems good this summer,
but I have not been out to see it.
But the buffalo are late,
and I always worry
about the bellies of our children.
I was thinking of a dance.
Yes, a dance is always a good idea.
It would be good
to have a strong sign.
Right.
There's a funny thing about signs.
We know when they are bad or good.
Sometimes they are strange
and it's hard to understand them.
A smart man
will think on these things.
If he is still confused,
he will tell somebody.
For instance,
he might tell you or me.
I have seen such a sign.
Really?
I saw a man.
A naked, white man.
Are you sure it was a man?
I saw his sex.
Did you speak to him?
No.
"It's been two days now
and nothing.
"My presence here
must have been reported by now.
"Have made all the preparations
I can think of.
"Cannot mount an adequate defense
as I am still alone,
"but will try to make a big impression
when they come.
"Waiting.
"Post-script,
“the man I encountered,
was a magnificent-looking fellow."
He might be a god
or some kind of a king
or a white chief
with special abilities.
That's what I think.
I do not care for this talk
about this white man.
Whatever he is, he is not a Sioux,
and that makes him less.
When I hear that more whites
are coming, I want to laugh.
We took a hundred horses
from these people.
There was no honor in it.
They don't ride well.
They don't shoot well.
They're dirty.
Those soldiers could not even
make it through one winter here.
I think they will all
be dead soon.
I think this fool
is probably lost!
Wind In His Hair's words
are strong and I have heard them.
It's true the whites are a poor race
and hard to understand.
But for sure
the whites are coming.
Even our enemies agree on this.
So when I see one man alone
without fear in our country,
I do not think he is lost.
I think he may have medicine.
I see someone who might speak...
for all the white people
who are coming.
I think this is a person
with which treaties might be struck.
Kicking Bird is always looking ahead
and that is good.
But this man cannot cover our lodges
or feed our children.
He is nothing to us!
I will take some men.
We will shoot some arrows
into this white man.
If he truly has medicine,
he will not be hurt.
Otherwise he will be dead.
No man can tell another
what to do.
But killing a white man
is a delicate matter.
If you kill one,
more are sure to come.
It's easy to become confused
by these questions.
It's hard to know what to do.
We should talk
about this some more.
That is all I have to say.
Let's go.
What's the matter, now?
We don't think
this is such a good idea.
Look, if we take the horse
of a white god,
they will make up songs about us.
Maybe.
I'm telling you,
they will ask us to go on raids.
Who gets the horse at the end?
I do.
I do, but we share.
It's a great plan.
It's always the same.
Yes, sir, I have.
No, I'll ask, sir.
- We'll be heroes!
- Real heroes!
They'll write songs about us!
We'll be heroes!
What happened?
I don't know,
but suddenly my arm doesn't work now.
You shouldn't have fallen off.
Now we'll get in trouble.
It was your idea.
My idea was only to take the horse,
it wasn't to fall down.
What happened?
Otter hurt himself.
What are you looking at?
I will be dead
when my father finds out about that.
Oh, God.
I am Wind In His Hair!
I am here!
Do you see I am not afraid of you?
Do you see?
The party that went against
the utes is coming back.
There are many hearts
on the ground.
“I realize now
that I have been wrong.
"All this time,
I've been waiting.
"Waiting for what?
"For someone to find me?
"For Indians to take my horse?
"To see a buffalo?
"Since I have arrived at this post,
I have been walking on eggs.
“It has become a bad habit
ahd I am sick of it.
“Tomorrow morning,
I will ride out to the Indians.
“I do not know the outcome
or wisdom of this thinking,
"but I've become a target
and a target makes a poor impression.
"I am through waiting."
What are you looking at?
Son of a bitch!
No, Wait.
Wait.
Wait, wait.
You need help. You're hurt.
You need help.
Let me--
You need help. You're hurt.
Let me help you.
No, no.
- You're-- You're hurt.
- No. No.
You're hurt.
Don't!
Let's play again.
Run away! Run away!
Run away!
She's hurt.
You are not welcome here!
No. She's hurt.
Go away!
Go away from us!
You are not welcome here!
Go! Go away from us!
- Get him!
- Get him now!
Get him!
Stop, stop.
The soldier did not
come here to fight.
He is going away
and we will let him.
Go away.
I am in agreement
with Kicking Bird.
We will go down
and talk to the white man.
And find out why he is here.
Listen. Listen to me.
If this council decides
to talk to the white man,
then it will be so.
But in my mind it's not right
that a chief as great as Ten Bears
goes to ask the business of a
puny, trespassing white man...
who has only a smart horse
and a few white man's clothes.
I will not go.
You will go.
And you will go.
That is all I have to say.
Welcome.
Hi!
Come.
Please, sit down.
Sit down.
Wait just a minute.
His mind is gone.
Wait, wait.
Tatanka.
Tanka?
Ta-- Tanka.
No. Tatanka.
Tatanka.
- Tatanka.
- Tatanka. Buffalo.
- Buffalo. Buffalo.
- Tatanka.
- Buff--
- Buff. Buff.
- Buff.
- Buffalo. Tatanka.
Got it.
"The Fierce One, as I call him,
seems a very tough fellow.
"I hope I never have to fight him.
"From the little I know,
he seems to be honest and very direct.
"I like The Quiet One immensely.
"He's been patient and inquisitive.
"He seems eager to communicate.
"I would conclude that he is a man
of some weight among his people.”
Buffalo.
“I believe I made an even greater
impression on their next visit.
"I produced a coffee grinder,
something none of them had seen before.”
Is the coffee not good?
It's a straw meal.
Sugar.
Put in.
Tas--
Taste it.
Sugar.
You want some?
That's a lot.
“It's good to
finally have some company.
"So much goes unsaid though
and I have the feeling that these people,
“The Quiet One in particular,
want something from me.
"Made presents of coffee
and most of the sugar.
"It didn't figure to last anyway.
"Don't believe
I go too far in saying
“that a foundation for good relations
is being laid."
Stands With A Fist.
We will talk awhile.
Your wounds, are they healing well?
Yes, they are.
You are happy here with my family?
Yes, I am glad to be here.
But, I must say,
I am missing my husband.
Perhaps you will marry again
when the time is right?
Perhaps.
We have word from many places
that the whites are coming.
They are coming
into everyone's country.
I think they will soon be in ours.
This white man who lives
at the old soldier fort,
I have visited him
and I believe his heart is a good one.
Good.
I am afraid of
the white man at the fort.
I am afraid he will
tell others that I am here.
I am afraid they will try
to take me away.
I've heard
they take people away.
Every warrior in the camp
would fight them.
I cannot make
the white man language.
He cannot speak our language Sioux.
It has been a long time
since I made the talk.
I want you to try.
- I don't know how.
- Yes, you do.
- I can't.
- Yes, you can.
I can't. It's dead in me.
I don't ask this for myself.
I ask this for all the people.
He knows things about the whites
which we do not.
You must remember.
You must remember!
I can't.
Will she make the white words?
She won't try.
She is being difficult.
Well, she's the one who's crying.
Perhaps the difficulty is yours.
Mine?
Christine!
Get them, Joe!
Get them chickens!
- That boy's growing fast.
- Very.
Billy, you get away
from those puppies now.
Mommy, look at my puppies.
Honey, come to daddy.
Damn!
Get the kids
and get them in the house.
- Go on!
- Get them in the house.
Christine!
Where are you?
I'm up here, mother.
- Get down now!
- Why?
Just do what I--
Come on, honey.
Come back, come on.
Oh my.
You stay right where you are.
Get back! Do you hear me?
- Hold it right there.
- Joe, get in the house right now!
Just stop.
Willie! Willie!
Who is it, Willie?
They look like Pawnee.
My father and your father
are talking to them.
- What do they want?
- I don't know.
Go on. You heard him.
Just get out of here.
Run, Christine!
I said run!
Joe! Joel
Christine!
Mommy! Mommy!
Mommy!
Mmm. Mmm.
Come on, Two Socks.
Bacon.
"Two Socks, like Cisco,
has become a trusted friend.
"He still won't eat from my hand,
"but his keen eyes and ears
"never fail to alert me
when something is wrong."
Tatanka.
No. I haven't seen any buffalo.
Sorry.
Are--
Are you hungry?
I have food.
I have-- I have a lot of food.
No.
“Nothing I've been told
about these people is correct.
"They are not beggars and thieves.
"They are not the bogeymen
they've been made out to be.
"On the contrary,
they are polite guests
"and have
a familiar humor I enjoy.
"Real communication is slow,
however,
"and The Quiet One
is as frustrated as I am.
"Most of our progress
has been built on the basis of failure
"rather than success.
“I've thought to inquire about
the woman I found on the prairie,
"whether she lived or not,
"but it seems far too complicated
a subject, given our limitations.
"One thing is clear, however.
"There are no buffalo,
and it weighs heavy oh their minds.
"Yesterday's meeting
was the best yet.
“It seems I've been
invited to the village,
"and I'm looking forward to going."
We were waiting for you.
Now tell him
we are glad that he is here.
Hello.
You... here...
good.
Thank you.
I feel good. I feel good.
He says he feels good.
Ask him why
he is at the soldier fort.
The-- The soldier fort.
- You come there--
- Wait. Wait.
What is your names?
- Our names?
- His-- His name?
He wants to know what your name is.
Right. Right.
He's right.
Introductions should come first.
And he--
He...
Kick--
Kick?
- M-more.
- More Kick?
- More Kicking?
- Kicking.
Kicking.
Bird?
Bird, Kicking Bird.
Kicking Bird.
- Kicking Bird.
What is he--
Is he chief?
No.
- Holy man.
- Shut up!
A ho-holy man.
Holy man.
Your name?
I-- I do-- I don't--
How are you called?
- What is he asking?
- My name.
Tell him. Tell him!
Yes.
Get-- Get up?
Stand up?
S-- Stands? Stands? Stands?
- Your name's "Stands"?
- Stands, Stands.
Okay.
- With--
- With?
- Stands With--
- With--
- With.
Fist?
Yes.
Stands With A Fist?
Stands With A Fist.
I'm John Dunbar.
John-- John Dunbar.
- Dunbar.
- Dunvar. John Dunbar.
John Dunbar
Dumb bear.
No, not dumb bear.
- Dunbar. Dunbar.
- Dun--
- Dunbar.
Not dumb bear.
Dunbar.
"There's been an exciting
breakthrough with the Indians.
"The woman I found on
the prairie speaks English,
"and today,
clear progress was made.
"She is a white woman,
and though I cannot be sure
"how she came to be
with these people,
“I can tell she is not a captive.
"While I am not afraid,
I don't feel completely welcome
"by everyone in the village.
"My being here
must be Kicking Bird's idea.
"He is very enthusiastic,
and like two children,
"we are both anxious
to know more about each other.
"But I find myself holding back.
"For some reason, I am reluctant
to answer all his questions.
"Maybe it's my sense of duty,
"but something tells me
not to say too much.
“It was good to see
Fort Sedgewick again.
"And yet I look forward
to another visit with my new neighbors.
"This is still my home, however,
"and I remain watchful for my relief
and can only hope
“that my negotiations
with the wild people of the plains
"will bear fruit.”
John: Buffalo!
Buffalo! I've seen buffalo!
Stop it!
Stop it, stop it!
- Buffalo!
- Stop it.
Buffaloes! Buffaloes! Buffaloes!
Tatanka, yeah.
Tatanka.
- Tatanka?
- Yeah.
There are Buffaloes!
"Riders were sent out
to pick up the trail.
“In the time it took
to gather my things at Sedgewick,
“the entire tribe
was well on its way.
"The efficiency of the people
and the speed at which they moved
"was enough to impress
any military commander.
"Spirits are high, and overnight
I've gone from a person of suspicion
"to one of genuine standing.
"I am greeted with open smiles
and looks of appreciation.
“In short,
I have become a celebrity."
Loo ten tant!
Loo ten tant! Loo ten tant!
"Scouts picked up the trail
exactly where I said it would be.
"It was not hard to find,
"a gigantic swath of torn-up ground
extending to the horizon.
“The sheer numbers it took
to create this impossible image
"was hard to imagine.”
Let's go.
We will go first.
Kicking Bird: Loo ten tant!
Loo ten tant.
"Who would do such a thing?
"The field was proof enough
“that it was a people
without value and without soul,
"with no regard for Sioux rights.
"The wagon tracks leading away
left little doubt,
"and my heart sank, as I knew
it could only be white hunters.
"Voices that had been
joyous all morning
"were now as silent as the dead buffalo
left to rot in this valley,
“killed only for their tongues
and the price of their hides."
Loo ten tant.
"It was suddenly clear now
what had happened,
"and my heart sank
as I tried to convince myself
“that the white men
who had been killed
"were bad people
ahd deserved to die.
"But it was no use.
"I tried to believe that
Wind In His Hair and Kicking Bird
"and all the other people
who shared in the killing
"were not so happy
for having done it.
"But they were.
"As I looked at familiar faces,
I realized that the gap between us
"was greater
than I could ever have imagined.
"As they celebrated into the night
the coming hunt,
“it was hard to know where to be.
“I don't know if they understood,
but I could not sleep among them.
"There had been no looks,
and there was no blame.
"There was only the confusion
of a people not able to predict a future.”
Nice.
Go the other way.
Go.
Go away!
Move it! Move it!
Let's go!
Come on!
Are you all right?
I can't.
No, I'm--I'm--I'm full.
I'm full, and I can't
tell the story anymore.
- Ah.
- Mmm.
No.
Do you wanna try it?
You wanna try it?
Here.
I can't. This is too much.
Good.
It's good trade.
This is--
This is a good trade.
No, no, I can't.
I'm full, I'm tired.
No!
- Come. See.
- No. No.
- One minute. One minute.
- One minute? One minute?
Okay.
- No, no.
- Loo ten tant! Loo ten tant!
Loo ten tant! Loo ten tant!
Loo ten tant!
Tatanka. Big tatanka.
Big tatanka.
Big tatanka! Big tatanka!
That's my hat!
Hey.
Hey!
You're wearing my hat.
It's my hat.
Now It's my hat.
No.
No, you--
My hat.
That hat belongs
to the lieutenant.
He left it on the prairie.
He didn't want it.
Well, you can see
he wants it now.
We all know
that it's a soldier's hat.
We all know who wears it.
If you want you can keep it,
but give something for it.
It's yours.
Thank you.
Good trade.
John: There you are.
Come here, Cisco.
“It seems every day
ends with a miracle here.
"And whatever God may be,
I thank God for this day.
"To stay any longer
would have been useless.
"We had all the meat
we could possibly carry.
"We had hunted for three days,
losing a half a dozen ponies,
"and only three men injured.
“I'd never known
a people so eager to laugh,
"so devoted to family,
so dedicated to each other.
"And the only word
that came to mind was 'Harmony.'
"Many times I've felt alone,
"but until this afternoon,
I'd never felt completely lonely.
"Made a long patrol today.
There was nothing to report.
"Time seems irrelevant,
except for the fact
“that I am bored
and these hours alone are endless.
"It is difficult for me to muster any
enthusiasm for my regular duties here,
"and the fort is showing
serious signs of neglect.
"The truth is, I am missing
the company of my friends.
"I can see all of their faces,
but somehow it is not enough.
“Tomorrow I will pay them a visit.
“It may be forward of me,
but what can it hurt?
"After all, they are my neighbors.
"The night sounds have become so familiar
as to be comforting.
"My life on the prairie
is a good one,
"and for the most part,
I am content.
“The Indians have a great pull for me
that goes beyond curiosity.
"There's something
wise about them,
"and I find myself
drawn to them in ways
“much stronger than
my obligations to the military."
Go home! Go home!
Damn him.
Hey! God!
Go home!
Go!
Go home, Two Socks.
Bad wolf! Bad wolf!
You were right.
He is a special white man.
Yes. He should have a real name.
"It is Autumn now,
"and I am spending more time
than ever with my friends.
"They have given me my own lodge,
and I feel comfortable there.
"We talk every day, but I know
Kicking Bird is frustrated with me.
"He always wants to know
how many more white people are coming.
"I tell him that the white people
will most likely
"pass through this country
and nothing more.
"But I am speaking in half-truths.
"One day there will be too many,
"but I cannot bring myself
to tell him that.
“I am sure that Stands With A Fist
knows that I am holding back,
"but to her credit,
she says nothing.
"A war party is going against
the Pawnee soon and I have asked to go.
"I sense that I made
a mistake in doing so,
"but I could not bring myself
to take it back.
"They are my friends,
and from what little I gather,
“the Pawnee have been
very hard on these people.
"I hope I have not
overstepped my bounds."
Come in, please.
- Sit down?
- No.
Kicking Bird wants to know
why you want to
make war on the Pawnee.
They have done nothing to you.
They are Sioux enemies.
Only-- Only Sioux warriors to go.
Well, then tell him that
I have been a warrior
longer than many of the young men
who will go on this war party.
Tell him.
He said that the Sioux way
of being a warrior
is not the white way.
You are not ready.
I know, I understand.
But tell him that I cannot
learn these ways in camp.
He also asks that you
watch over his family
while he is gone.
This thing he asks
is a great honor for you.
Tell him that I would be happy
to watch over his family.
He thanks Dances With Wolves
for coming.
Who is Dances With Wolves?
It is the name
which all the people
are calling you now.
Dances With--
That's right.
That day.
Dances With Wolves.
How do you say it?
- Right.
Keep on with the white man talk
if it pleases you.
I like to make the talk.
Where are you?
I'm here.
We'll walk.
- Oh, I- I cut this off.
- Oh.
- I shaved it off. More.
- Grass grows on the prairie.
- "Grass grows on the prairie"?
- Wrong.
- Wrong?
You said,
"fire lives on the prairie."
I did?
No--
No laughing, though.
Try this.
"That man is a fighter."
Again.
- "That man is a fighter."
- Okay, I have it.
That man...
Yes.
is a bone.
Right?
No.
No?
Try this.
What's the word for "beautiful"?
What are you doing?
It's hot, and we are
sitting in the shade.
I'm hungry.
How is Dances With Wolves?
What do you mean?
How is he learning?
He is a fast learner.
What did you think I meant?
You go--
You go for water today?
Yes.
Then let us take you.
How did you get your name?
I was not very old
when I came to be with the people.
And I was made to work.
I worked every day, very hard.
There was one woman
who didn't like me much.
She used to call me bad names,
and sometimes she...
Beat me?
And one day,
she was calling me these bad names
with her face in my face,
and...
I hit her.
I was not very big,
but she fell down.
She fell hard and didn't move.
And then I stood over her
with my fist
and I asked if
there was any other woman
who wanted to call me bad names.
No one bothered me after that day.
No, I-- I wouldn't think so.
Show me.
Show me where you hit her.
Why are you not married?
- I'm sorry.
- I have to go.
I'm sorry.
Can I help you?
You are not talking today?
No, I am not.
Some of your words are wrong,
but you are learning fast.
So what can I tell you today?
I want to know about
Stands With A Fist.
Why is there no man with her?
She is in mourning.
I don't under--
I do not understand "mourning."
She cries for someone.
Cries for who?
It is not polite
to speak of the dead.
But you are new,
so I will tell you.
She cries for her husband.
He was killed not long ago.
That is how you came
to find her on the prairie.
How long will she cry?
It is Kicking Bird's place
to say when she is finished.
He's the one that found her
when she was very little.
Thank you.
People are talking about you.
What are they saying?
They are saying that...
they are proud of the medicine
you are making
with Dances With Wolves.
I have hurt him,
and I should go talk to him.
You can't. He is gone.
He left this morning.
Bet you were thinking,
"now, why don't he write?"
Hello, Two Socks.
Come on.
I won't hurt you. Come on.
You can do this.
Come on.
This is easy.
This is easy, Two Socks.
I am in mourning.
No, we cannot.
Yes.
We must be careful.
- We must be careful.
- Okay.
Wait, wait, wait!
What?
Trouble.
The Pawnee are coming.
A big party of 40 or 50 men.
The Cheyenne hunters
found them not far to the north.
Soon be in our camp.
Stone Calf, wait.
I will follow you.
The Pawnee do not come for horses.
They come for blood.
Get your weapons
and come to my lodge.
- I will go.
- No.
- I will get them.
- Okay.
Stone Calf, wait!
I have-- I have guns.
I have many rifles.
Many. Many.
I can get them.
- At the fort?
- Yes.
No, The ride is long.
Guns would make
Ohne warrior like two.
Take one man and go quickly.
I will take Smiles A Lot.
Go!
Wait! I will help you!
Okay!
Shoot the gun!
Grandma!
Get back!
"It was hard to know how to feel.
“I'd never been
in a battle like this one.
"There was no
dark political objective.
"This was not a fight
for territory or riches
"or to make men free.
“It had been fought
to preserve the food stores
"that would see us
through the winter,
"to protect the lives of women
ahd children and loved ones
"only a few feet away.
"Stone Calf was a great loss,
"but even the old men could not remember
such a one-sided victory.
"And I gradually began
fo look at it in a new way.
“I felt a pride
I'd hever felt before.
“I'd never really known
who John Dunbar was.
"Perhaps the name itself
had no meaning.
"But as I heard my Sioux name
being called over and over,
“I knew for the first time
who I really was."
When we were younger, he always
bragged about how brave he was,
and what a great chief
he would make.
He thought I was impressed.
While walking on the prairie,
we surprised a small herd of buffalo,
and the first thing this
brave warrior did is run for a tree.
He would have
forgotten all about me
if he hadn't needed
my help to climb it.
And we sat there all day
as this old cow circled below,
making loud noises and hitting
her head against the trunk.
You're lying. You're lying now.
And I remember this thing
like it was yesterday.
Where are you going?
There is gambling tonight.
- Horseback's games are always good.
- No, no. Not tonight.
I'm tired. I'm tired. Horseback already
has a good rifle of mine.
- Come on!
- Please excuse me.
Have a good night.
So he sat on the tree all day.
And he couldn't stop
staring at the cow.
The cow thought
we was in love with her.
Sometimes I see him smiling to himself
and I wonder if he thinks about that cow.
How long will
Stands With A Fist mourn?
I don't know.
I hope it will not be too long.
Has something happened?
What?
She has found love again.
With who?
Who do you think?
Tell me.
Dances With Wolves.
What?
Are you certain of this?
When you see them together,
you will know.
What are people saying?
They like the match.
No one is angry?
It makes sense.
They are both white.
I suppose I will be the one
to say something.
She's your daughter now.
I know.
Relax. You can't see
everything coming.
Stop it. Quit your playing.
- Stands With A Fist.
- Yes?
You will mourn no more.
Sit. Sit.
There's talk
that you want to get married.
To who?
To Stands With A Fist.
- That's the one, isn't it?
- She's in mourning.
- Not today.
- Kicking Bird has released her.
He did?
What are you doing here?
Kicking Bird told me to
sit here and wait.
You might have
to wait a long time.
Smiles A Lot says he saw kicking Bird
riding on the prairie. Yeah.
He says he was talking to himself.
A medicine man takes it pretty hard
when he is the last to know something.
What do I do?
Hmm.
You are pretty poor
and a Sioux girl is not for free.
I don't know
if you can get married.
I have the buckskin--
No, that's too much medicine.
Do you think my horse
is too much medicine?
For a girl.
Wait here.
Maybe we can help you.
- Wait.
That's all I do, is wait!
- Thank you very much.
- You're welcome.
Thank you.
"The whole village was eager
to take up a collection on my behalf.
"The generosity of the people
was astonishing.
"The more valued the gift,
the more easily it was given.
"Even the poorer families wanted
to give up animals they could not afford.
"It was hard to turn them away.
"Black Shawl was a mystery.
"I couldn't guess what she was thinking,
and she offered no advice,
"no words of encouragement.
"I may well have been
the brunt of an inside joke
“that included the entire village.
"But I was determined.
"Wind In His Hair told me
if all the gifts were gone in the morning,
"my offer had been accepted.
"I spent a sleepless night wondering
what misstep, if any, I had made.
“I had no idea what
Kicking Bird's decision would be."
Turn around.
You look good.
You know, the man she mourned for,
he was my best friend.
I didn't know that.
He was a good man.
It has been hard for me
to like you.
I am not the thinker
Kicking Bird is.
I always feel anger first.
There were no answers
to my questions,
but now I think he went away
because you were coming.
That is how I see it.
This is a good day for me.
And for me.
And also for you.
If you want this man,
take his hand in yours.
I declare you husband and wife.
"I had never been married before.
“I don't know if all grooms
have the same experience,
"but as Kicking Bird began to speak about
what was expected of a Sioux husband,
“my mind began to swim in a way
that shut out everything but her,
“the tiny details of her costume,
"the contours of her shape,
"the light in her eyes,
"the smallness of her feet.
“I knew that the love between us
would be served.”
Have you heard
all that I have said?
Hey, have you heard
Yes.
Good, then take her inside.
She is your wife.
Oh, good.
I really appreciate it.
Bye.
Dances With Wolves' door
is closed a lot these days.
I think they're having trouble
making a baby.
I don't think
they're having trouble at all.
If we pull the smoke flap shut,
they will come out for sure.
Dances With Wolves,
are you in there?
Today I am riding
to a far away place.
I would like you
to ride with me.
It's good to be out.
Yes, it must be.
We are trying for a baby.
No waiting?
No waiting.
I was just thinking
that of all the trails in this life,
there is one that matters most.
It is the trail
of a true human being.
I think you are on this trail,
and it is good to see.
We call you The Busy Bee.
I'm kidding.
It is said that
all the animals were born here.
That from here they spread over
the prairies to feed all the people.
Even our enemies agree
that this is a sacred place.
It's quiet here.
Yes.
I think that...
we must wait for these people.
No.
They've been gone a week.
Maybe more.
We will water the horses
and go home.
You always ask
about the white people.
You always want to know
how many more are coming.
There will be a lot, my friend.
More than can be counted.
How many?
Like the stars.
The stars.
The stars?
It makes me afraid
for all the Sioux.
We should tell this to Ten Bears.
The men who wore this came...
in the time of my
grandfather's grandfather.
Eventually, we drove them out.
Then the Mexicans came here.
In my own time, the Texans.
They have been
like all the others.
They take what they want
without asking.
I don't know if we are ready
for these people.
But I think you are right.
I think they will keep coming.
This helmet remind me of that.
Our country is all that we have,
and we will fight to keep it.
Tomorrow we will
strike the village.
You have everything
from the soldiers' fort?
Yes.
There's nothing for me there.
That's good.
The journal.
Stands With-- Wait!
- It is important!
- No!
The words in the book
are like a trail for people to follow.
Now, it tells everything
about my life here. You must get it.
Enough!
We cannot wait for you.
I'll catch up. I'll catch up.
Soldier: Injun! Injun!
- Get him!
- Injun!
- Keep firing!
- No!
Stay down. Stay.
Oh, God.
Hey, boy.
It's okay.
Something has happened.
Dances With Wolves is not coming.
He must have trouble.
Pick two good men
and send them back to the soldier fort.
Yes.
Bauer: Spivey.
- Spivey!
- Yeah, sergeant?
Tell the major he's waking up.
Move your worthless ass.
You got yourself a hell of a shiner,
didn't you?
Soldier: Major's coming through.
Well, does he speak English?
I don't know, sir.
Speak English?
Talk English?
Talk!
I speak English.
Who are you?
Lieutenant John J. Dunbar.
This is my post.
Why are you dressed like this?
I came out from fort Hayes last April,
but there was nobody here.
Do you have proof of that?
My journal's on the bunk
in my quarters.
My orders are in the journal.
It will tell you everything.
Spivey, you and Edwards
were the first ones here.
Did you find anything?
A journal?
No, we didn't find nothing, sir.
Where's Edwards?
He's outside.
He-He didn't find nothing either.
You turned injun, didn't you?
Didn't you?
What did you say your name was?
Dunbar.
D-u-n-b-a-r. John.
You say you're an officer.
Oh, God,
did you read my orders?
No.
Well, they're in my journal.
There are no orders.
There's no journal.
Why are you out of uniform?
I have to relieve myself.
- Sergeant, take care of it.
- Sir.
Let's go.
- He's a white man.
- Doesn't look white to me.
- They say he's a soldier.
- He's an officer. Officer.
Well, do you salute him
or shoot him?
Here, you, eyes front.
I said eyes front!
Don't shoot him!
Get him! Get him!
- Get him!
- Get off!
Get him off!
Get back!
Why are you out of uniform?
- What's the army doing out here?
- Hey.
- Lieutenant's asking the questions.
- Bauer.
We're charged with apprehending--
We're charged with apprehending hostiles
and recovering stolen property,
retrieving white captives
taken in hostile raidings.
There are no hostiles.
We will ascertain
that for ourselves.
Now, if you'll guide us to these camps
and serve as an interpreter,
your conduct will be re-evaluated.
- What conduct?
- With all due respect--
Your status as a traitor
might improve,
should you choose to
cooperate with the United States army.
There's nothing for you
to do out here.
Are you willing
to cooperate or not?
Well, speak up!
I am Dances With Wolves.
- What's that?
- I am Dances With Wolves.
I have nothing to say to you.
You are not worth talking to!
Sergeant, form a detail
and take this man down to the river.
- Let him clean up his face.
- Yes, sir.
Not you, Spivey.
Lieutenant. Lieutenant.
Major wants to see you.
Hey, Spivey?
Hey, Spivey, you got paper?
- What's it to you?
- Well, give me some, shit-bird!
Can you read?
No, I can't read.
What the hell's the difference?
You can't read either.
Now, just give me some.
Well, give me some!
All right! Hold your horses.
Bauer!
B--
Hey, let go of me!
Lap it up, injun.
Go ahead. Lap it up.
You son of a bitch!
I'll kill you!
Hey, hey, hey. Hey.
It's all right.
He's going to get hungrier,
that's all.
But maybe that don't matter.
Word is they're going to
ship you back to Hayes.
And once you get there,
they gonna hang you.
Come on. Forget about him.
Go on. Get out of here.
All right.
Get up in there!
Get up in there! Hey!
In there!
Hey, hey!
Git up!
Hey, spivey, what is that?
Looks like he's following us.
Hell, I'm going to shoot him.
Dang. You missed him.
Don't shoot, god damn it.
It's my shot.
- Hey, Wait. I seen him first.
- Get down!
Look at that stupid bastard.
He ain't even moving.
Wait a minute! That's my shot!
Shoot him!
Get him, Edwards.
He's standing there.
- He ain't running, is he?
- Shoot him!
- Jesus Christ!
- Holy shit!
Bauer!
He's killing him.
- Bauer, get him off him!
- Get him now!
He might have killed you.
I'll get that son of a bitch.
Sit down, god damn it!
That's it.
I got him! I got him!
Dead shot, boys.
Come on.
- Son of a bitch!
- Spivey!
- Get up!
- That's the way you do it.
Get up! I'm gonna shoot--
Get up!
- I mean it! Get up!
- Spivey!
Get up!
Come on, get up!
- Spivey.
- What?
You bash that prisoner one more time,
I'll put those shackles on you.
You men get back here!
Shit!
God damn it!
Get down here.
Boo.
Clear behind that stand of trees?
- Hey!
- All right, Let's go.
I don't see nobody.
Indians!
God--
Bauer!
That's what you deserve!
No.
No! No.
I love you.
Dances With Wolves
is quiet these days.
Is his heart bad?
Killing the soldiers
at the river...
was a good thing.
I was glad killing those men.
But the soldiers hate me now,
like they hate no other.
They think I am a traitor.
And they will hunt for me.
And when they find me,
they find you.
I think it would be wise
to move the village now.
I must leave.
I must leave and talk
with those who would listen.
Must leave?
No! No!
No! You can't leave!
No!
Quiet. You are hurting my ears.
Go out now. Go.
You are the only white man
I have ever known.
I have thought about you a lot.
More than you know.
But I think you are wrong.
The man the soldiers
are looking for
no longer exists
and there's a new one instead.
Let's smoke awhile.
"With Ten Bears,
it was always more than awhile.
"There was purpose in everything he did
and I knew he wanted me to stay.
"But I was sure of myself.
"I would be an excuse and that's all
the army would need to find this place.
“I pushed him as far as I could
to move the camp,
"but in the end he only smiled
and talked of simple pleasures.
"He reminded me that at his age,
a good fire is better than anything.
"Ten Bears was
an extraordinary man."
You have nothing to say?
What can I tell you?
What's ever on your mind.
You've made the decision.
My place is with you.
I go where you go.
You're not afraid?
No.
I told Ten Bears we'd leave
when the snow breaks.
Did you tell everyone?
Not everyone.
Damn it!
It's all right.
You...
finish your pipe?
Good pipe.
Not bad.
Does it smoke?
I've never smoked it.
We come far, you and me.
I will not forget you.
Dances With Wolves!
I am Wind In His Hair!
Do you see
that I am your friend?
Can you see you're in my heart?
Can you see that
you will always be my friend?
Dances With Wolves!
Sergeant!
Over here! Now!
Improved subtitles by Shay Avrahami
English - us - psdh
english - us - psdh